In 1862, the Confederate States of America purchased 14 civilian vessels in New Orleans, Louisiana, for conversion into military ships. These became the River Defense Fleet, which was commanded by Captain J. E. Montgomery. The ships were intended to defend the Confederate-held part of the Mississippi River. The fleet was operated by the Confederate States Army. To emphasize that this force was distinct from the Confederate States Navy, many of the vessels were named after army officers. Some Confederate naval officers believed that purchasing and converting these vessels was a waste of resources that should have been focused on ironclads or other existing vessels. Several sources state that the vessel that became General Earl Van Dorn was previously known as Junius Beebe; others state that Junius Beebe instead became CSS General Sumter. General Earl Van Dorn was a sidewheel steamer. She measured 182 feet (55 m) in length, and had similar dimensions to General Sumter, with a beam of 28 feet 3 inches (8.61 m), and a depth of hold 10-foot-7-inch (3.23 m). She was named after Earl Van Dorn, the Confederate commander at the Battle of Pea Ridge.

The vessels of the River Defense Fleet were intended to be used as rams, and they were known as cottonclad warships. Their conversion into warships involved the addition of 1 inch (2.5 cm) of iron plating to the bow, backed by 4 inches (10 cm) of oak planking on a framework of 1 square foot (0.093 m2) timbers. The engines and boilers were protected by an inner bulkhead of one-foot-square timbers with an outer bulkhead of 6 by 12 inches (15 cm × 30 cm) timbers. In between the bulkheads was cotton. General Earl Van Dorn's armament consisted of a single 32-pounder cannon on her bow, which was a common naval gun that was smoothbore and muzzleloading. General Earl Van Dorn was placed under the command of Captain Isaac Fulkerson. Competing strategic goals had led to a split of the River Defense Fleet. The Confederate States War Department desired that the ships serve in the Tennessee, Kentucky, and Missouri area to protect this portion of the Mississippi River, but local interests pushed for the ships to remain at New Orleans. Rather than sending all of the ships upriver, the Confederate commander at New Orleans, Major General Mansfield Lovell, retained part of the fleet at New Orleans after a river barrier defending New Orleans failed. General Earl Van Dorn left New Orleans on March 25, and reached Memphis, Tennessee, on April 3. A week later, her cottonclad conversion was completed with the finishing of the ironwork. She was sent to Fort Pillow along with CSS General Sterling Price and CSS General Bragg.